good afternoon
today i'm joined by sir simon stevens
chief executive of nhs
england and brigadier phil prosser who
is commander of military support
to the vaccine delivery program across
our united kingdom
because i know there's now one question
at the very top
of your minds and that is how fast and
how effectively
we can get these millions of new
vaccines
into the arms of the most vulnerable and
those who need them most
and you want to know that we in
government
the nhs the armed forces local and
regional government
uh government at every level are truly
throwing everything
at it around the clock if necessary and
i believe that with the country once
again in lockdown
and all the difficulties that means for
you for
your family for students for education
uh
for your businesses and
of course with the tragic number of
deaths that we're seeing that we've seen
today
you have a right to understand exactly
how we're cracking this problem and how
the national vaccine
effort is progressing and you rightly
want to know
how we're going to reach the target that
i set out
earlier this week of offering a slot for
vaccination
uh by 15th of february for everyone in
those key
groups identified by the joint committee
on vaccination
and immunization that's over 12 million
people in england
and 15 million in the uk
including older care home staff
eldercare home residents and staff
everyone 70 or over
all frontline nhs and care staff
and all those who are clinically
extremely vulnerable
and just to remind you of the importance
of these groups
for fighting the disease they account
for 88
of all those who have sadly lost their
lives
and so our tactics
uh first to use the immense natural
capacity
of the nhs and by the end of the week
there will be over 1 000
gp led sites providing vaccines 223
hospital sites seven giant vaccination
centers
and a first wave of 200 community
pharmacies
if all goes well these together should
have the capacity
to deliver hundreds of thousands of
vaccines per day
by january the 15th and it is our plan
that everyone should have a vaccination
available within a radius of 10 miles
and it follows from that that the limits
will not be on
our distributional power but on the
supply
of vaccines and i have no doubt
that we have enough supply to vaccinate
these four groups
by the february the 15th deadline and we
also have
the distributional network to do it
and to continue an expanding program
down that priority list
yes let's be clear this is a national
challenge on a scale
like nothing we've seen before and it
will require
an unprecedented national effort and of
course
there will be difficulties appointments
will be changed
but as brigadier prosser will shortly
explain
the army is working hand in glove with
the nhs and local councils
to set up our vaccine network and using
battle preparation techniques to help us
keep up the pace
we'll publish our full vaccine
deployment plan
on monday along with daily updates
on the progress we're making we've now
vaccinated 1.26 million people in
england 113 000 in scotland 49 000 in
wales
and 46 000 in northern ireland so all
together
nearly 1.5 million people across the uk
have now received their first dose and
within two to three weeks all of them
will have
a very considerable degree of immunity
and it's thanks to the arrival of the
oxford astrazeneca vaccine
which can be stored at room temperature
that we can accelerate the pace of
vaccination
in care homes we're using that vaccine
in care homes for the first time today
and by the end of the month
we hope to have offered every elderly
care home
resident a vaccine our new national
booking service
will also make it easier to book and
access
appointments so i urge everyone to come
forwards because it's absolutely vital
that we should have confidence in these
vaccines
i want to thank everyone involved in
this extraordinary national effort
all the gps nurses pharmacists all the
staff
behind the scenes our armed forces local
councils
our scientists who've not only developed
the
oxford astrozenica vaccine the first
ever likes life-saving
treatment of covid in the form of
dexamethasone
but also i'm pleased to tell you today
uh british scientific research
has now contributed to uh to the
creation of more
new life-saving treatments that have
just passed rigorous
clinical trials in pr in particular uh
tos
tosilisu mob i'll sorry i'll say it
again
uh toshili zumab and sarilumab
shortly on everybody's lips which have
been found to reduce the risk of death
for critically ill patients by almost a
quarter
and they've cut time spent in intensive
care
by as much as 10 days and these
life-saving drugs will be available
through the nhs
with immediate effect potentially saving
thousands of lives
and finally again i want to thank you
the british public for coming forward to
be vaccinated in the numbers that you
have
still greater than all the countries of
europe put together
and yes of course we are in a race
against time
but i can assure you that we are doing
everything we can
to vaccinate as many people as possible
across our whole
united kingdom and in the meantime
please
stay at home protect the nhs and save
lives and i'll now
hand over to simon stevens
thank you very much and maybe i can
start by thanking my
colleagues across the health service who
are at the moment confronting an
incredibly serious
situation we've got 50 more coronavirus
in patients in our hospitals now than we
had at the peak of the
april first wave and that is true
in every region in the country now more
covered in patients than
back in april and that number is
accelerating very very rapidly we've
seen an increase of 10
000 hospitalized coronavirus patients
just since christmas day
that's the equivalent of filling 20
acute hospitals with extra coronavirus
patients
and of course many of those will be
patients who caught the infection
between christmas and new year given the
delay between
catching infection and becoming
seriously ill
and that is of course all happening at
what is traditionally the busiest
time of year for hospitals and the wider
nhs
and so whereas in april for every one
coronavirus inpatient we were looking
after
two other hospitalized patients for
other conditions
now for every one coronavirus inpatient
we're looking after
three other patients for other
conditions so the pressures are
real and they are growing and that is
why
as the prime minister says i think the
message from nurses from paramedics from
intensive care staff
from gps from pharmacists from everybody
in the nhs is that it is vital that we
do
all take the steps necessary to control
the growth of infection and so there is
nobody
more motivated to deliver a vaccination
program speedily
than the staff for the health service
because they are living day by day
with the consequences the tragic
consequences for
patients and for families and for
colleagues of not having coronavirus
under control
and so the prime minister has set this
very challenging but hugely
important goal that we are able to offer
the covid vaccine to everybody aged 70
and above as well as patients who are
clinically extremely vulnerable
and the health and care staff who look
after them by the 15th
of february and as he says uh if that
offer
is accepted and we very much hope that
when people are invited for vaccination
they will come forward
to take up the offer then that has the
potential to
prevent the majority of the deaths that
we have seen the vast majority of the
deaths that we have seen
looking back over the last year
i think it's fair to say that we have
made a strong start on the coronavirus
vaccination program in this country as
the prime minister says uh four times
more
people vaccinated here than in germany
uh 300 times more than in france
but there is no complacency because
frankly we need a huge acceleration
if we are over the next five weeks going
to vaccinate more people
than we typically vaccinate over five
months during a winter
flu program we've got 39 days to do it
and so the plan for the next 39 days
has these three essential components
first of all expanding the supply of
vaccines
that we can administer secondly more
places
doing the jabbing and thirdly the nhs
expanding the number of people and the
partnerships who are helping us get the
job done
so on vaccine supply as you know on the
8th of december
we were able to provide the first
covert vaccination approved by an
independent
regulator here in this country to
margaret keenan
in coventry and during
the course of january we will have much
more vaccine supply than we had in
december
and during february we will have more
vaccine supply in addition to that
so assuming uh i'm providing that that
vaccine supply continues to be available
to us as
it looks as if it will be then we will
certainly be able to offer
all the vaccination slots that the prime
minister has described
so vaccine supply is coming online the
second part of it then of course is more
places
where the vaccine is administered and
we want to increase the number of
people and places doing vaccination as
supply increases day by day and week by
week
and there are three ways in which people
will be invited to
come forward to get their vaccination
the first and the bulk of the
vaccination will
be through local gp practices and
pharmacists together
offering services to their local
patients and we've expanded the number
of places from 116 across the country
that were doing that
in mid-december to 739 of these local
vaccination services today
growing to over a thousand by the end of
next week in addition to that secondly
we've got
hospital hubs that will be vaccinating
social care and care home and nhs staff
and their numbers have expanded from 50
to 206
and that will be 223 essentially the
bulk
of the hospital sites across the nhs
providing that service from the end of
next week
and then thirdly in addition we are
establishing these larger vaccination
centers that will work
seven days a week extended hours in
sports stadia
and other public venues where people
will also be invited if that is more
convenient
for them and what we're trying to do
with these three routes
is get the balance right between the
efficiencies the scale efficiencies that
you get from some of these larger
centers
combined with the local convenience of
the options through your
local gps and over time from pharmacists
as well
there's been quite a lot of discussion
in the press about the
interesting uh successes that the
israelis have been having
they have chosen to do most of their
vaccination
through these larger bespoke vaccination
sites rather than through their local
pharmacists and the local gps
we think given the geography of this
country actually having a mixture
of those different routes will be the
right answer and we will steadily expand
those number of ways in which you can
get vaccinated as supply continues to
increase so firstly expanded supply
secondly an increase in the number of
places that are
providing vaccination and then thirdly
of course
matched by an increase in the number of
people who are doing the vaccinating
many of whom will come from our partners
not just the
nhs and so we've now got over
80 000 people who are trained on these
particular types of vaccinations
able to administer them of whom
eighteen thousand uh have uh already uh
begun
work in different contexts the saint
john's ambulance
are working with us they've identified
over twenty thousand volunteers
who want to come and help together with
the royal voluntary service
and others and in addition to that we
are
unashamedly tapping into the logistics
brilliance of the
armed forces to ensure that the supply
chain and the distribution
works well alongside the usual channels
that hospitals and gps and pharmacists
provide
and it's that combination then of those
three parts to the plan that are what
are
we think going to give us the
opportunity to make that offer to
millions of people
over the next five weeks but at that
point let me uh promise to hand over to
uh brigadier prosser
i think we'll describe the role that the
army are playing in supporting us in the
nhs
thank you prime minister so i am
brigadier phil prosser and i am
coordinating the military support to the
government's vaccination program
i think it's important to note that all
aspects of our work have been in support
of the nhs
my team are embedded with them and in
the past
eight weeks we've been working with some
of the most professional
dedicated and amazing people that i have
had the honor to serve alongside
we are one team the main assistance we
have provided is planning support
drawing on our extensive operational and
logistic experience
we are adding to what is already an
extremely high performance team
in nhs england headquarters
in my day job i am commander 101
logistic brigade
and it is my role to deliver combat
supplies to uk forces in time of war
my team are used to complexity and
building supply
chains at speed in the most arduous and
challenging conditions
the military uses three steps to plan
and deliver complex operations
first we analyze the situation and the
mission we then identify choices to
select the best plan
and then we execute that plan at pace
in this case the mission is to support
the nhs
in delivering the maximum amount of
vaccine to minimize the number of
infections and deaths
as quickly and as safely as possible
we have worked shoulder to shoulder with
the exceptional nhs team
sharing clinical and logistical analysis
the plan has many challenges which are
difficult to balance
we need to make sure every one of you
has equal access
to the vaccine no matter where you are
in england
we need to be mobile enough to access
those clinically vulnerable in care
homes
the plan is reliant on fisa storage down
to minus 75 degrees
and it must be flexible enough to allow
us to adapt to changes
as the situation evolves so the plan
needs to be agile we aim to deliver
vaccine
as soon after it is supplied as possible
not leaving vast quantities in the in
the warehouse
it needs to be in arms not on shelves
an added complexity is that this all
takes place against the backdrop of a
global pandemic
and the logistical and workforce
challenges this brings
the final phase is to execute the plan
our aim is to deliver operational
excellence
working with the nhs we use techniques
tried and tested on previous operations
in the uk and abroad to deliver command
and control to the activity on the
ground
ensuring performance targets are met and
resources are allocated to where they
are needed most
a vaccination program of this scale has
not been done before
and we are learning as we go in the
event in the event it is required we
also have 21 vaccination quick
reaction reaction force teams made up of
six military healthcare experts
able to deploy anywhere in england at
short notice
i've found this logistic operation to be
unparalleled
in its scale and complexity and i say
this having served on operations
around the world to give you some
impression of the work that has been
done
in the 30 days this program has been in
operation we have delivered 1.26 million
doses of vaccine
hundreds of millions of consumable items
and established 769 sites
that's the equivalent to setting up a
major supermarket chain in less than a
month
and next week we will further increase
our footprint by another
20 percent
i've been immensely proud to see how
everyone in this program
has stepped up to deliver professional
excellence when the country has needed
it most
at every level the nhs and my team have
faced numerous challenges with their
heroic will to succeed
it is truly a one-team approach
i am a proud member of the armed forces
an organization drawn from all
communities across the uk
and the commonwealth my team and i are
honored
to be able to serve those communities
and to protect our nation at home
i feel immensely proud of our collective
national effort in supporting the nhs
and i truly believe we will defeat this
pandemic together
thank you thank you very much brigadier
thank you uh thank you very much simon
let's go to judith from leeds
how can early years provision be safe if
primary schools are deemed to be a
vector for the spread of the virus
is this not defeating the purpose of
this lockdown
uh well thanks very much judith i might
ask simon to comment on this as well but
the the the whole point is of course
that we believe that schools
are uh safe uh and indeed
uh all places of education are safe
judith
including uh early years provision it's
just that
uh we have to look at the overall budget
of
of risk the overall spread that uh
schools can
uh can be involved in but there are
other very very important
uh reasons for wanting to keep early
years uh provision going to
help key workers to help uh vital
services
uh uh continue uh during the pandemic i
hope you
uh you you you appreciate the the the
distinction
um simon you want to add to that well no
obviously
you know we defer to the advice of the
chief medical officer and sage on these
these uh points um but as you say
prime minister a lot of the staff of the
health service do
rely on having available child care and
so doing everything we can to
while keep our schools and early years
education
safe nevertheless enable people to
continue to come to work as a
critical care nurse or as a junior
doctor that is hugely important to the
nhs's effort as well
thanks a lot let's go to stephen from
sheffield university students have been
encouraged to not return to rented
town time addresses but have not
received anywhere near the same quality
of service that they would have received
if it were not for the pandemic
can the government outline then the ways
that it intends to support university
students over the coming weeks thanks
very much stephen and
this was a question that i've been asked
repeatedly in the course the last uh
few days and uh i i think that uh
we need to look very hard at the deal
that students are getting
stephen and we need to see if we can
what more we can do frankly to
to support uh students and uh to help
them
uh in what has been a very very
difficult time and uh
you know of course at the moment they're
they're not able to go back to their
to their universities uh except for a
very very few
uh key practical uh courses
uh and uh i know how frustrating that is
and i know that i know the financial
frustrations that that entails and i i
can tell you stephen that we're
we're looking at that now and you'll be
hearing more uh about that from
the education secretary let's go to uh
alex forsyth of the bbc many thanks
before coming on to kobe i'd just like
to ask about
the events in the u.s prime minister was
donald trump responsible for inciting
the crowds that stormed the capital
and on covid you've set some pretty
ambitious targets for your vaccination
program
how confident are you that this time you
can deliver on your promises
and how close now is the race between
the vaccine and the virus
well uh thanks very much alex look on on
the uh
the the united states i i just want to
and and the election i want to say
that all my life america has stood for
some very important things
an idea of freedom and an idea of
democracy and
uh as you as you say as you suggest in
so far as
uh he encouraged people to
storm the the capital and in so far as
the
uh the president consistently has cast
doubt on uh the outcome of a free and
fair
election i i believe that that was
completely
wrong i think what president trump has
uh been saying about that has been
uh completely wrong and i
and all i can understand is i'm very
pleased that the
president-elect has now been uh properly
confederally confirmed
uh in office and uh and that democracy
has prevailed
uh and on your on your second question
alex
about uh where we are well we're going
to go if we're going to go at it flat
out as
i have said we will do everything we
possibly can
uh to achieve this and the purpose of
this uh
press conference today is just to give
uh you a chance and to give the public a
chance
to see a little bit more of the working
a little bit more of the detail
but that's just the beginning uh you'll
be hearing
uh more on monday uh from from matt
hancock uh about the exact plan
uh and and how we are going to get to
that uh to that target uh by the 15th of
february though
the joint those first four groups of the
uh the joint committee of vaccination
and immunization and
i think it was very important to stress
what uh what simon
what's the simon said that you can make
a huge difference
if you reach all those groups but we do
depend
on people coming forward i really do
urge people
uh when you get a notification when you
get
a message from the nhs from your doctor
saying that you're
eligible for for a vaccine please take
it can we go to emily morgan
of itv thank you prime minister i wonder
if you can tell us in the clearest
possible terms
why it is that gps aren't getting
regular supplies
of the vaccine and why they don't know
when their next delivery is going to be
well uh i will hand over to simon to try
to
uh to to go into what the gps may or may
not be getting today but to the best of
my knowledge
we are rolling out uh supplies of of
both vaccines to
uh to to gp surgeries and as
uh as as i said earlier uh just now
by the end of next week there will be uh
roughly a thousand uh
gp uh primary care network uh
vaccine distribution services of more
than 200 hospitals will be
distributing the vaccine seven huge uh
vaccination centers big vaccination
centers and
um uh 200 first wave of 200 community
pharmacies so
uh there's a big big network uh the
supply
is being uh rolled out but i think what
i won't uh
hide from you emily is that of course in
the early phases
there are going there's going to be
lumpiness and bumpiness in the
in the distribution and uh today uh it
may be that some gps aren't getting the
consignments
uh that they expected i know that other
gps i certainly know from firsthand
experience other gps
are doing an incredible job of getting
those jabs into into people's arms but
simon is there anything you want to say
in more detail about what gp's going to
expect i think that's right i mean look
today is the first
day in which it was last night that uh
approval was given to
uh start using the astrazeneca vaccine
uh the oxford trading vaccine uh in uh
gp
local vaccination services and so that
vaccine is being distributed
uh today tomorrow uh the weekend uh
two practices to get going um
look there will be bumps along the road
this is this is a program that
each day we'll be delivering to uh you
know more than a thousand different
locations uh with hundreds of thousands
of people getting uh
jabbed uh by the time we've got that
expanded supply
available each day so there will be and
you will hear in the media
uh from those uh people who uh where
there's an issue is arisen
perfectly fair enough what you won't
hear from of course are the other
uh you know 98 of uh practices or
locations where it's all working
smoothly so i think we just got to you
know have a
a sort of a sense of gathering around to
get this thing done
uh as a big team effort uh rather than a
sort of a poking and a prodding
and that's the spirit i know that the
whole of the nhs is mobilizing around
thanks very much simon thanks emily
victoria mcdonald channel 4.
thank you prime minister many of the
patients in
hospital right now with covert will have
been infected
before christmas do you now regret not
locking down earlier and can i also ask
there is a lot of concern amongst nhs
staff about the people out there who do
not
believe this is happening that this is
all fake news
and that hospitals are empty what
message do you have for them
well uh victoria on the on the the speed
of the government's reaction don't
forget that
i think we were told about the new
variant and the way it was taking off on
uh on the 18th and uh
we went into uh the tier four measures
uh
across vast bulk of the country uh
pretty much within the next
24 hours and uh if you and i'm on the
on the kind of people who stand outside
hospitals and say
uh covert is a hoax and this kind of
this kind of stuff you know really
uh they i do think they need to grow up
uh
i think you heard eloquently now from
the head of nhs england
the pressure of the nhs is under and
we've all got to
to do our bit responsibly to protect it
and
for a lot of that a lot of us that means
making sure
the vast majority of the country that
means making sure we stay at home
and protect the nhs for for people uh
who are getting invited to
get a vaccine go and get the job i would
just answer that
the i mean let's just be completely
straightforward about it when people say
that
it is a lie if you sneak into a hospital
in an empty corridor at nine o'clock at
night
and film that particular corridor and
then stick it up on social media
and say this proves the hospitals are
empty the whole thing is a hoax
you are not only responsible for
potentially changing behavior that will
kill people
but it is an insult to the nurse coming
home from
12 hours in critical care having worked
her guts out under the most demanding
and trying of circumstances
there is nothing more demoralizing than
having that kind of nonsense spouted
when it is most obviously untrue and so
actually
looking at some of the reports that uh
channel four and there i say it uh
bbc fergus walsh had a brilliant report
last night from
uh university college hospitals the same
has been true for itv
sky i mean you are reporting what is
actually going on
that is what people need to concentrate
on thanks very much
chris smith of the times uh thank you so
simon firstly just to pick up on those
rather sobering numbers you presented
earlier on and also on
leaked data showing hospitals in london
and in the midlands elsewhere
are on course to exceed general and
critical care capacity in in the next
couple of weeks
are you confident that patients full
covered and for other conditions are
going to be able to receive
the normal standard of care over the
next month
and on vaccination on to pick up on the
distinction being drawn in the
government's vaccination pledge
between offering vaccination to the four
priority groups
and actually vaccinating them um so so
simon do you have any
estimates of uptake so far and prime
minister can you make the additional
commitment not just to offer the vaccine
but even if it means moving on to
younger age group to have actually
vaccinated
more than 13 million people by february
15.
in reverse then chris so on the first
point uh obviously vaccination is
voluntary so we can't
uh require it wouldn't be right to
require that all of those eligible in
this first
phase take up the offer but i think
the evidence from this year's flu
vaccination program
is that uptake is likely to be high over
80 percent of people aged 65 and over
have taken up the flu jab this year
that's up by 10 percentage points uh on
last year
and as i think i've previously discussed
uh having flew
and covid at the same time significantly
increases your risk of
death so i think people have heard that
message and are we're finding a very
good response
when people are invited to come forward
uh that they will do so
we're not just going to uh let that sort
of find its own level we're also going
to make sure that we are
paying particular attention over the
next uh four or five weeks to
those groups who we definitely want to
see come forward where there's been some
targeted misinformation
including uh some of the minority ethnic
communities across the country who are
being
really disgracefully targeted with
nonsense about uh
vaccination and then if vaccine supply
is such that
after everybody who's come forward uh
wants to come forward has uh
has done so we've still got vaccine
available and obviously we will be
coming back to government and
uh asking governments and the chief
medical officers for their
uh permission to use that in other ways
we want to make sure that the vaccine
supply we've got gets into
people's arms on your first point
um look i mean the situation in london
as well as across
parts of the southeast and increasingly
the rest of the country given this new
variant
is very serious i mean we are seeing uh
over 800 patients a day
admitted to london hospitals with
coronavirus i mean that is the
equivalent
of a new synthesis hospital full of
covered patients
fully staffed every day or a new
university college hospital
full of coronavirus patients every day
so it is absolutely vital that the
measures that are now in force uh do
begin to
uh have an impact on slowing the and
cutting the
infections across london and the rest of
the country
in the meantime what hospitals are doing
as you probably
know chris is they are expanding their
critical care
uh into other parts of the hospital
so-called surge
capacity so we've got over 300 of these
surge critical care beds open across the
country
that is putting obviously great pressure
on staff that's what we will continue to
do
but it is vital that the infection rate
now comes under control
and chris you are asking whether we can
do more than 13 million
and and uh whether we can ex or more
than 50 million
or whether we can we can exceed the
target i think is what you said and i
want to stress this is a
a very challenging stretching target as
i think that simon
said right at the at the beginning but
it's i think it's vital for us in
government to set ourselves
uh the most difficult possible uh
targets that we think we can conceivably
achieve
because i know that's what you and the
public will want us
to be doing right now this is
everybody's
in lockdown as everybody can see the nhs
is under extreme
pressure already uh we have to get this
done as fast and
and as efficiently as possible and
uh i do believe that it is attainable i
do believe that those numbers
are doable but clearly it will be a big
stretch it will be a huge
national effort and uh we want to
to be frank we want our working and our
efforts to be
uh scrutinized and to be and to be
visible
uh in order to give the maximum possible
confidence and that's the
the purpose of what what i'm saying
today and what we'll be saying
from monday in the in the coming days uh
let's go to will james of reuters
thank you um a question for sir simon
first
um people who had their first shot of
the pfizer vaccine
they're getting worried because they had
their appointments cancelled that
they're not going to get their second
shot
can you guarantee that they will get
that vaccine in their arm in time the
second dose
and to the prime minister you sit at the
top of a
a pyramid of experts scientists analysts
advisors you see all the information and
all the forecasts and you make your
policy decisions based on that
the people don't see that information
but they want to be able to judge
how bad things are going to get and they
want to be able to judge your
performance
your government's performance against
that target so
based on the decisions that you've made
what is your expectation of the overall
toll of this virus come this spring
okay well on the on the first question
well the answer is a very
straightforward one which is
yes people will get their second jabs
whether that's pfizer
or astrazeneca as you know
the health service has been asked
following the
medical advice from the independent
regulator the joint committee on
vaccinations and immunizations and the
chief medical officers
to put the optimal gap between having
your first dose and your second dose so
within
12 weeks because the data from the
pfizer jab shows that after 12 days
you've got perhaps 90 plus of the
benefit
anyway and as a result it means that
we're able to
offer vaccination to many more people
twice as many people with that pfizer
dosing over the next several weeks and
so just to make it personal and i
haven't actually asked my
uh i haven't asked my mum whether she
minds me saying this but my
parents are both in their 80s neither of
whom have yet been
offered the jab um as a consequence of
doing this
uh both my mum and my dad will be able
to get a first dose
uh whereas had we not done this it would
just have been one or the other
and uh on on your question about the
uh the overall uh toll
uh well i i can't give you that number
what i can say is it will be tragically
far too
high uh though every uh death is a
is a is a tragedy we we mourn uh every
every person that we lose in this
in this pandemic uh but the number will
depend
of course on uh how successful we are in
rolling out the vaccine program clearly
that'll be one important thing
uh for the arguments that you've heard
because of the arguments you've heard
uh this afternoon but also perhaps even
more importantly
uh it will depend on our continued
ability to work
together to stop transmission and that
is why we're having to do the measures
that we are uh at the moment so it's it
in in a sense
it it depends on all of us uh following
the guidance protecting the nhs that is
that is the crucial thing uh let's go to
sapphire slay of the evening standard
prime minister uh i'd like to pick up on
some of
simon's comments about london hospitals
which are pretty much staring into the
abyss right now
they are described as being less than
two weeks from being overwhelmed even
under the best case scenario why was it
more done to stop us
ending up here and what are you doing
right now to help the capitals hospitals
and my second question is for all of you
really when the vaccine was announced
last year
many people expected that they would
soon be able to hug their elderly
relatives again
and that care homes would be able to
open their doors within weeks
can you really spell out for us what the
reality of the position is now
how long before grandma can be hugged
how long before care homes can let
residents have a day out with their
families
okay well on your on your first point uh
sophia
the four chief medical officers for
england and wales and scotland and
northern ireland
they said on monday that given the
rising infections particularly this new
variant
uh quote without further action there is
a material
risk of the nhs in several areas being
overwhelmed in the next 21 days close
quotes that's why
the uh level uh the risk level was
raised if you like
and we clearly are seeing that in london
which is why
the london hospitals are i'm expanding
the number of beds they've got available
they're making use of the independent
sector
the london nhs intends to open the
london nightingale next week which also
by the way will be being used as one of
our large vaccination centers so that
londoners
have the option of being vaccinated
there so i think there's no doubt
that hospitals and indeed gps the london
ambulance service the entirety of the
health service in london
is mobilizing to do everything it
possibly can but
the infections the rate of growth in
admissions that is what
collectively the country's got to get
under control
uh and uh just on um
the the way ahead i really want to
repeat what i've been saying over the
last over the last couple of days
because there are
there are lots of conditionals uh for
the the february 15th
uh deadline if uh the vaccine program
goes ahead of the speed that we've
all been talking about this afternoon if
there are no new variants that we
uh that we uncover that uh mean we have
to change our plans
uh again uh if the vaccine remains uh
efficacious and we've got no reasons
to think that the the vaccines are not
efficacious
uh at the moment uh then i i really do
think that by february the 15th
uh there will be the chance i hope very
much there will be the chance
uh to uh to look at some uh some
relaxations of
restrictions and as i've said uh schools
will will certainly be the
the priority that we want to address and
and repeat
uh i do think that um uh things will be
uh
as as the chris whittie and others have
said i do think things will be
uh much better by the spring uh by april
uh things will be very different
but all that depends uh on the rollout
of the vaccine program which we've
discussed and
you'll be hearing a lot more about but
above all on our continued willingness
to come together protect the nhs
stay at home and save lives thank you
all very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app
and get the full story with bbc dot co
dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news